There were people running,
screaming, fire, spears.
The city was being invaded.
But it seemed like he didn't care.
He was still sitting, drawing
mathematical shapes in the sand.
Until a Roman soldier threatened him
with his sword
and wanted to capture him.
The old man, calmly, raised his eyes,
looked at him,
and told him that firstly
he would finish his demonstration.
Then he looked down
and kept drawing in the sand.
When Romans invaded Sicily,
Syracuse seemed an easy target.
However, it took them
more than two years to conquer it.
It was the first battle in which
technology made a difference.
Catapults and big cranes were used
to spin ships up in the air,
and many other innovations.
Plutarch says that Romans were so scared
that they saw a rope or a pulley
and started running.
All those inventions were the work
of only one man.
Who was that giant who,
with his inventions,
made the Roman army tremble?
None less than Archimedes,
the most important mathematician
of Antiquity.
Finally, the Romans conquered the city.
The soldier was obviously upset
with Archimedes' attitude,
and killed him with his sword.
A terrible mistake for which
he paid a very high price,
because his General,
Marcus Claudius Marcellus,
deeply admired Archimedes.
In fact, Marcus Claudius,
while he could have taken
all the treasures of the city,
he chose one that fitted in any bag.
A device made by Archimedes.
Cicero says it was
a kind of portable planetary,
that showed the position of the Sun,
the Moon, the stars;
and when he made it work,
it predicted eclipses.
How could this portable planetary be?
Cicero says he never
thought that a human being
could be such a genius
to do something like this.
The Roman general chose it
before any other treasure.
How could it have been?
Can you imagine what was it like
to have it in your hands?
Having the chance to study it,
investigate it, touch it?
However, as many ancient marvels,
it was lost forever.
Or at least it seemed so,
because in 1900 a sunken ship was found
at the bottom of the Mediterranean Sea,
close to Antikytheras island
full of treasures from the Greeks' time:
statues, jewelry, coins
and something quite odd.
This: a bunch of spare parts
of what looked like
an ancient clock full of gears.
This in itself was quite revolutionary
because devices like this
appear in the late Middle Ages,
1500 years later.
Could they be the remains
of Archimedes' device?
To answer this question
we would have to first rebuild
the original device from the parts
and make it work again.
A Quixotic challenge
that is taking more than a century.
In the 50's, an American named
Solla Price worked on it;
And then two British men:
Michael Wright in the 90's,
and Tony Freeth and his team in 2000.
Freeth's team made extremely
high resolution CT scans
that let us see the interior
of the fragments.
See for yourselves.
We start from the outside and little
by little we enter the fragment.
This is really important
because in the Museum
we are not allowed to break the device
to see what is inside.
Look at those teeth,
look how they are conserved after
2000 years underwater.
Now we are advertising the first
submersible tablets.
This is submersible!
2000 years underwater!
Look at it: it's crazy.
According to what we could rebuild so far,
the mechanism was protected
by a wooden box
and had a cover at the front
and a cover at the back.
At the front, it had two
concentric scales:
one was divided
by the twelve zodiac signs
and the other one
by the 365 days of the year.
Over these scales, a needle spins
and shows at the same time
the position of the Sun in the sky
and the day of the year.
But over those scales
there is also another needle
that shows the position
of the Moon in the sky.
The mistake of that needle,
according to current values,
Is 0.0002 days per turn.
But that's not all.
The Moon doesn't move
at a constant speed.
Sometimes it goes faster
and sometimes slower.
These guys could keep the Moon needle
from going at a constant speed,
so that it speeds up
when the Moon goes faster
and slows down when it goes slower.
And as if it wasn't enough,
the Moon's needle
had a little ball painted
half black and half white,
that spun showing
the phases of the Moon.
If you ask me, only Archimedes
could have done something like this.
At the back we have two big spiral clocks.
The first one is an eclipse predictor.
Do you remember that Cicero said
Archimedes' clock predicted eclipses?
Eclipses repeat themselves
every 223 months.
For each one there is a cell,
most of them are empty.
But when there's an eclipse,
the cell informs if it is solar or lunar,
if it would be observable
and even when it would happen.
The one above has two
little clocks inside.
One of them makes a complete turn
every four years
and showed the user when
the Olympics would take place.
(Laughter)
The big spiral is a lunisolar calendar.
that divides 235 months in 19 years.
It's an extremely accurate calendar.
We have to add a day every four years
to our calendar
on the leap years,
so it doesn't disarrange.
To this calendar,
we have to remove a day every 76 years.
Of course, we can say:
Who is going to remember to remove
a year every 7 decades?
To do that, the mechanism
had another little clock
that took one turn every 76 years
to remind the user
that he had to skip a day.
The calendar has the names of the months
and that was very important
because every Greek city
had its own calendar with its own names.
And we could determine
that the calendar of the mechanism
matches with the Corinth calendar
or that of its colonies.
Do you know which city was a colony
of Corinth for a long time?
Syracuse, Archimedes' city.
Is this then Archimedes device?
Truth is Archimedes'
and Antikytheras' device
cast the same type of spell
on those who get in touch with them.
We know that the Roman General
was haunted when he saw it
and he chose it over any treasure.
Something similar to what happens
to Gollum in The Lord of the Rings
with Frodo's ring.
Cicero was also amazed when he saw it work
and became Archimedes' fan.
Archimedes' mechanism
had that kind of charm.
But a very similar one has Antikytheras'.
Solla Price, once he saw the fragments,
worked with them until he died.
Michael Wright was almost fired
for investigating this device.
Tony Freeth mortgaged his economic
future for the investigation.
I myself have to confess
that I fell under its spell.
And I've been working on it
for 5 years nonstop.
I remember the first time I saw
the fragments at the museum in Athens
I was hypnotized, I couldn't stop
looking at them.
I must have spent several hours
watching the fragments
from every possible angle.
Until the museum's security got nervous
thinking I wanted to steal it.
And actually, I wanted to!
But it's not just its spell
what makes us suspect
it's the same device.
There are several signs
pointing at Archimedes:
it could be Syracuse's calendar,
Ciceros description matches a lot
with what we could rebuild,
the eclipses predictor
also leads to Archimedes.
However, there's still
a very important proof missing.
Without that, we have nothing.
It's the mechanism's construction date.
To give it a date, we tried to study
the shape of letters,
of the script, but the margin
of error is too big,
more than a hundred years.
Carbon-14 only works on organic material
and the gears are made of bronze.
But there's another chance.
In the eclipse predictor we have the hours
and the days in which
eclipses will happen.
If we found the series of eclipses
that better fit these data,
we would know when it was built.
This proposal is valid in theory
but never worked in practice
because there is a lot of data
of the eclipse predictor
that we don't come to understand well.
Something very annoying is that
while it predicts every lunar eclipse,
it only predicts some
of the solar eclipses.
For some reason, the person
who made the device
decided to skip some solar eclipses.
Those forgotten eclipses
don't seem to follow any logic,
they seem randomly skipped.
They are those red eclipses there.
One evening after working
with the CT scans,
I simply thought about
relocating the eclipses
from the spiral below to the spiral above
to see how they would fit.
I didn't have any reason
to do it, I just did it.
And look what happened.
It seemed magical.
Suddenly all the eclipses
organized in forming rays,
and what's most important,
those skipped eclipses,
formed two very defined rays.
I have found the logic
of this eclipse skipping.
I communicated this to my
research partner, James Evans
and he immediately understood
what it was about.
That gave us a lot of information
about the eclipse predictor.
Maybe now we could find
the date of construction.
We started working immediately.
It was years and years
of burning our heads.
Of following dead-end strategies.
Of getting excited with a result
to later realize
that we had made some silly mistake
with calculations.
Until one Sunday of February,
last year,
I was at my colleagues house in the US
and we realized that there was
no way to move forward.
That even using all the data we had,
we had too many possible dates.
I remember that day, we said goodbye
with the bitter feeling
that the project that was taking
more than three years had failed.
I couldn't believe it.
I kept myself together in front of him
but when I went down the stairs -
I was sleeping in his basement,
which was full of books
on the history of Astronomy,
it's spectacular -
when I went downstairs and I sat
on the bed, I couldn't believe it.
I couldn't mourn.
So many years working
and we didn't find anything.
I started to revise,
to make the calculations again,
I reviewed everything.
Until suddenly I thought
about considering data
about the lunar anomaly
we hadn't considered.
And that data was extremely powerful.
I did the calculation
and it eliminated all but one candidate.
That night we found the result.
And we were about to quit!
And we were very close to the solution.
Today, after one year and a half
of reviewing carefully
every calculation and checking all data,
I can officially announce
that the first eclipse of the device
happened on June 25th, 205 B.C,
at 15:35, Athens local time.
(Applause)
That means that the calendar
could have started in September or August
of 216 B.C., when Archimedes was still -
our dearest Archimedes -
alive and kicking.
Yes, ladies and gentlemen,
this mechanism might have been made
by Archimedes himself.
I imagine you will arrive home today
and you will start looking up
information on the Internet,
if you aren't doing it already.
You can do it, there is a lot,
but if you suddenly realize
that you've spent the last 10 hours
in front of the computer,
that you forgot to have dinner or lunch,
or that you skipped work, be careful.
Be careful.
Maybe it's too late and you have fallen,
like many of us, under its spell.
(Applause)